OpenWISP Shines at the GSoC Mentor Summit 2024
==============================================

:date: 2024-11-19
:author: Gagan Deep
:tags: gsoc
:category: gsoc
:lang: en
:image_url: https://openwisp.org/images/blog/gsoc-24-mentor-summit/hero.jpg

.. figure:: {static}/images/blog/gsoc-24-mentor-summit/hero.jpg
    :alt: Gagan Deep and Federico Capoano at GSoC Mentor Summit 2024
    :align: center
    :height: 400px

This year, the Google Summer of Code (GSoC) Mentor Summit was hosted at
the remarkable Google MP3 Office in Sunnyvale, California, I and `Federico
Capoano <https://github.com/nemesifier/>`_ had the incredible opportunity
to represent OpenWISP. It was an exhilarating experience that I am
thrilled to share with our community.

With attendees from all corners of the globe, the Mentor Summit felt like
a reunion of open-source enthusiasts, each representing diverse
organizations but united by a shared passion for innovation and open
collaboration.

The Mentor Summit is an "un-conference", meaning there's no predefined
schedule. Instead, attendees propose topics and host rooms for group
discussions on subjects of shared interest. This format fosters a
collaborative, open atmosphere where workshops are less about formal
presentations and more about dynamic exchanges of ideas. It's a chance to
dive deep into topics, brainstorm solutions, and learn directly from the
diverse experiences of others in the open-source community.

Lightning Talk: Improving UX of the Notifications Module
--------------------------------------------------------

Lightning talks are short, 3-minute presentations where mentors have the
chance to share highlights of their GSoC projects. The format is
fast-paced, requiring speakers to focus on the most impactful aspects of
their work. These brief talks offer a snapshot of the diverse projects
being mentored, sparking conversations and inspiring others.

.. figure:: {static}/images/blog/gsoc-24-mentor-summit/lightning-talk.jpg
    :alt: Gagan Deep giving lightning talk
    :align: center
    :height: 400px

The biggest highlight of the summit for me was the opportunity to share
our work on `"Improving UX of the Notifications Module"
<{filename}./gsoc24-improve-ux-notifications-module.rst>`_ by `Dhanus SL
<https://github.com/Dhanus3133>`_ in a lightning talk. The Notifications
Module in OpenWISP is integral for network administrators, providing
alerts and updates on crucial network events. This year's GSoC project
focused on enhancing usability, making notifications clearer and more
intuitive, while offering users greater control over their preferences.

Learning from the Community
---------------------------

Apart from the talks and workshops, the summit provided a unique
opportunity to network with some of the brightest minds in the open-source
community. The wealth of experience in the room created a fertile ground
for exchanging innovative ideas and discussing potential collaborations.

.. figure:: {static}/images/blog/gsoc-24-mentor-summit/group-photo.jpg
    :alt: Group photo of all attendees at GSoC Mentor Summit 2024
    :align: center
    :height: 400px

    Â© 2024 by Google LLC is licensed under CC BY 4.0

It was fascinating to hear how other mentors approach mentorship and
overcome challenges within the GSoC structure, especially those
organizations that, like OpenWISP, have been in the program for many
years.

Looking Forward
---------------

Attending the GSoC Mentor Summit was a memorable and enriching experience,
both as a representative of OpenWISP and as a member of the open-source
community. My journey with GSoC began as a contributor in 2020 with
OpenWISP, and I later transitioned into mentoring projects in the
following years. The summit provided the perfect opportunity to finally
meet Federico, with whom I've been collaborating for the past four years.
It was also a privilege to connect with the brilliant minds behind GSoC at
Google. We are excited to implement the insights gained from this
experience and look forward to continuing our work in innovation and
collaboration.

We hope this glimpse into the summit has inspired you. If you're
passionate about open-source, consider collaborating with the OpenWISP
community.
